Mojinora 1.0.0 User Guide

System requirements and installation
Windows 11 / x64. No development tools, such as Node.js, are required.
The installer includes the required runtime files and works offline.
Installation is for the current Windows user and requires no administrator privileges.

1. Run the installer and select a language.
2. Review the terms of use and choose the installation folder.
3. Choose a desktop shortcut and the Open with Mojinora context-menu entry.
4. On File associations, select groups or individual extensions.
5. Optionally select Open Windows default-app settings on the final page.
   Choose the formats you want to open by default in the settings page.
6. Launch Mojinora from the Start menu.

File context menu and associations
Open with Mojinora works with files of any extension, including extensionless files, but not folders.
On Windows 11, it appears under Show more options in the file context menu.
Multiple documents open as tabs in the existing window. Reopening a file preserves its unsaved edits.
Unsupported files and folders produce an explanation while other documents continue to open.
Associations register Open with and default-app candidates only. Setup never changes current default apps.
Fresh installations select Markdown (.md / .markdown / .mdown / .mkd) and text/logs (.txt / .text / .log).
Configuration/data and source-code groups are also available. Choose a whole group or individual extensions; partial groups show a mixed state.
Enter custom extensions separated by commas, semicolons or spaces and click Add, for example .abc; txt.
A leading dot is added, case is normalized and duplicates are removed. A suffix must be 1–63 characters excluding the dot.
Paths, wildcards, extra dots, control characters and known unsupported file types are rejected.
An excessively long list produces an error; reduce the number of custom extensions and retry.
Context-menu and extension choices are retained on the next in-place installation.
Deselecting an extension removes its candidate entry without changing the selected default app. Choose a different default in Windows Settings if needed.
Uninstalling removes only Mojinora registrations, leaving other apps and user documents unchanged.

Silent installation (no administrator privileges)
Mojinora-Setup-1.0.0-x64.exe /S /currentuser /CONTEXTMENU=1 /EXTENSIONS=".md;.txt"
/CONTEXTMENU=0 or 1 controls the context-menu entry.
/ASSOCIATIONS=1 selects only .md / .markdown; 0 selects none.
An explicit /EXTENSIONS list takes precedence. /EXTENSIONS="" selects none. Invalid values exit without changing registration.
Silent installation never opens default-app settings.

Language
For a new installation, the app uses the first preferred system language:
Japanese when it is Japanese, and English otherwise.
In Settings > General > Language, choose Use system setting, 日本語, or English.
Save settings and restart the app to apply a language change.
Existing language preferences are preserved when updating.
Your document content and file names are not translated.

Updates
Save your work, close Mojinora, and run the new installer.
Use the existing installation folder. Uninstalling first is not necessary.
Documents, images, settings, and recovery data are preserved. Updates are manual.

Files on network drives
When native change notifications are unavailable, the app automatically checks
for changes approximately once a second. External changes, deletion, and recreation
are detected; the response time depends on the connection.
If you have unsaved edits, external changes prompt a choice instead of overwriting your work.

Editing
New tabs use plain text. Click the file type at the bottom right to switch to Markdown (formatted) or Markdown (source).
Change the default under Settings > General > Text editing > Default document type.
Files ending in .md, .markdown, .mdown, or .mkd open as Markdown; other text files use text editing.
Ctrl+S saves and Ctrl+Z undoes. Keyboard shortcuts can be changed in Settings.

Exiting and restoring your session
When closing the app with unsaved documents, one dialog lists the affected documents.
Save all and exit saves each document, asking for a location for untitled documents.
Keep session and exit leaves the original files unchanged, records the open tabs and unsaved content in the recovery area, and restores them automatically at the next start.
Discard changes and exit does not retain unsaved edits. Cancel, a cancelled save, or a failed session write leaves the app open.
The session includes tab order and the active tab, text, Undo/Redo history (up to 201 states), encoding/BOM/line endings, selections and scrolling, editing/preview modes, document-specific indentation and syntax, bookmarks, folds, split panes, and the sidebar folder and expanded nodes. Managed images needed by the history are retained too.
Large logs are reopened at their recorded position, encoding and follow setting; the entire file is not copied. An unavailable log shows a Retry button in its tab.
File > Restore last closed session replaces the current tabs after confirmation. Unsaved documents also prompt you to save or discard. Cancelling midway leaves all tabs open.
Other exit choices start with an empty document next time. The manual checkpoint excludes discarded untitled documents and discarded edits and history.
The next normal exit replaces the checkpoint. Automatic restoration happens once; the checkpoint remains available for manual restoration.
For ordinary documents, recorded text and history take precedence over files changed or deleted externally. Review the notification before loading the external version, overwriting, or using Save As.
Search results, comparison views, dialogs, running macros and export operations are not restored. Settings export does not include the session.

Markdown preview
Select the eye icon, Preview, in the Markdown toolbar to read the unsaved document.
Back to editing or Escape restores the previous formatted/source editor, selection, Undo history and scroll position.
Preview state and reading position are kept per tab until it closes. Find, Replace and file-type changes return to editing.
Select and copy text, follow links, and navigate the table of contents and footnotes. Raw HTML is shown as text, never executed.
Unavailable images or formulas display an explanation while the rest of the document remains readable. Remote image permissions still apply.

Settings backup
Settings > Backup > Export writes all saved preferences and shortcuts to JSON, named Mojinora-settings.json by default.
Unsaved changes in the settings dialog are not exported. Import loads a draft; Save Settings applies it and Cancel discards it.
Invalid files, unsupported fields, invalid values and shortcut conflicts leave both current settings and the draft unchanged.
Documents, recovery data, saved macros and temporary per-document preferences are excluded. Language changes take effect after restarting.

Text editing
Click a line number to select the whole line, including its newline. A final line without a newline selects only its text.
Drag up or down across line numbers to select multiple lines. Wrapped text counts as one logical line; dragging beyond the viewport scrolls the editor.
The same operations work in Markdown source, code blocks, split panes, large logs and file comparison.
Text editing, both split panes and the large log viewer use 3px margins on all sides.
Undo and Redo at the top right target the active document, even while the search input is focused.
They are disabled in preview, in the large log viewer, or when no relevant history exists.
The icon toolbar contains Editing tools, Find, Replace, Go to line, Line wrapping, Split editor and Compare files.
Editing tools is a flat menu for line operations, indenting, comments, folding and bookmarks.
Sorting and deduplication affect selected logical lines, or the whole document without a selection. A selection ending at the next line start excludes that line.
Sorting uses natural numeric order. Deduplication keeps the first exact match and preserves order and the final newline.
Toggle Whitespace at the bottom right; the preference is retained after restart.

Selected text conversions
Select text and choose an operation from Editing tools. Conversion is disabled without a selection.
- Lowercase / Uppercase
- Full-width to half-width (hiragana stays unchanged)
- Full-width letters/digits to half-width, or the reverse (letters and digits only)
- Full-width katakana to half-width, or the reverse
- Tabs to spaces / Spaces to tabs
The three hiragana-related operations have been removed from the menu. Existing custom shortcuts and saved macros still work.
Tab conversion uses the document tab size and the column before the selection. Mid-line space runs reaching a tab stop also convert to tabs; remaining spaces stay unchanged.
Unmapped characters, circled numbers and kanji are preserved. Multiple and rectangular selections convert independently and remain selected afterwards.
Line operations merge overlapping selected lines and process separate blocks independently. Each conversion is one Undo step.
Conversions have no new default shortcuts. Assign keys in Settings > Shortcuts; existing custom keys are preserved.

Syntax language is detected from the file name. Click the file type at the bottom right to search and change it. Fold code from the gutter.
Changing file type preserves the file name, content, encoding, and Undo history. Manual choices last until the tab is closed.
A thin line marks the current visual line. Disable it with Underline the current line in Settings.
Click Spaces: 4 (or the current value) at the bottom right to choose tabs/spaces and a width from 1 to 16 for the current document. New documents use the defaults in Settings.
Tab inserts a tab character or spaces to the next tab stop. With a selection it indents lines; Shift+Tab unindents.
Alt-drag creates a rectangular selection. Ctrl+D adds the next matching occurrence to the selection.
Ctrl+F2 toggles a bookmark; F4 / Shift+F4 moves between bookmarks. Bookmarks last until the tab is closed.
Ctrl+G goes to a line. Settings include wrapping, whitespace, font, tab size, and space indentation.
The default body font is Consolas at 14px. You can change it in Settings. Updates preserve your saved font preferences.
Hold Ctrl and scroll up/down over the editor to increase/decrease text zoom (50–200%). Zoom is shared across tabs for the current run and does not change the saved font size. Ctrl+Shift+0 (Actual size) resets it to 100%. Each launch starts at 100%.
Ctrl+F / Ctrl+H opens search / replacement with regex, whole-word, and selection-only options.
Regex replacements support $1, $2, and $<name>. Searches stop after 3 seconds and show up to 10,000 results.

Encoding and line endings
Click the encoding indicator at the bottom right. Apply, then save the document.
Supported encodings: UTF-8, UTF-16 LE/BE, CP932 (Shift_JIS), EUC-JP, and ISO-2022-JP.
If automatic detection is incorrect, save unsaved changes first, then use Reopen with encoding.
Saving stops without changing the original file if characters cannot be represented in the selected encoding.
Choose LF, CRLF, or CR. Mixed line endings are preserved at unchanged locations unless explicitly converted.

File drops and product information
Drop one or more document files on the sidebar, tab bar, top bar, editor, or status bar to open them.
Dropping images into a Markdown editor inserts them. For mixed drops, images are inserted into the original document before other documents open.
Folders and unsupported files are reported without preventing other documents from opening.
Help > About Mojinora displays the installed version.

GREP search and replacement
Use Ctrl+Shift+F for GREP search or Ctrl+Shift+H for GREP replacement.
Enter a folder path or use Browse. The sidebar folder is not changed. Subfolder search is enabled by default.
Separate include/exclude patterns with semicolons, for example *.txt;*.log or src/**/*.ts.
Only saved files are included. Unsaved tabs, binary files, files over 50 MiB, symbolic links, and junctions are excluded.
Results stay below the editor while you edit or switch tabs. Drag the panel edge to resize it; use its controls to edit conditions, search again, stop, or close.
Click a result to navigate to the match. Search again if the file has changed since the search.
Review Before and After, select files, and choose Replace selected files.
Files changed externally since preview, and tabs with new unsaved changes, are skipped.
There is no combined input size limit. Results are limited to 1,000 files / 10,000 matches. Cancelled or truncated results cannot be used for replacement. Initially 200 matches per file are displayed; Show more reveals the rest.
Replacement is recalculated one file at a time, preserving encoding, BOM, and line endings. Unrepresentable characters or output exceeding 50 MiB prevent that file from being written.
Original bytes are backed up in replace-backups under the settings folder. The result shows the backup location.
Folder replacement cannot be undone using document Undo. To restore, close the affected tabs and copy the corresponding .bak files to the original paths listed in manifest.json.

Split and compare
In text editing, Ctrl+\ splits the same document into two views sharing edits and Undo history.
Compare files shows another tab in a read-only comparison. Each document must be no larger than 10 MiB.

Recorded macros
Press F9 in text editing to start recording, perform typing and editing commands, and press F9 again to stop. F8 replays.
Save macro and Manage macros provide named storage, playback, and deletion. Arbitrary scripts are not supported.
Typing, newlines, character deletion, arrow-key movement, and line commands are recorded. File operations and mouse selections are not recorded.
Playback is one Undo step. Use Stop playback or Escape to stop.
Limits: 10,000 actions / 1 MiB per recording, 100,000 actions per playback, and 100 saved macros / 8 MiB total.

Large logs
Files over 50 MiB open read-only. Files over 1 GiB are loaded in sections instead of being held entirely in memory.
Navigate using First, Last, Previous/Next page, or the position slider. Line numbers are relative to the displayed page.
Follow appended content reloads the tail approximately every second, including truncation or replacement at the same path.
Large files are excluded from editing, document search, folder search/replacement, comparison, and macros.
Very long lines are shown in parts. Legacy Japanese encodings may require reading earlier bytes to determine character boundaries, making position changes slower.

Markdown editing
Switch between formatted editing (WYSIWYG) and direct Markdown source editing.
Ctrl+S saves, Ctrl+Z undoes, Ctrl+1–6 applies headings, and Ctrl+0 applies body text.
Ctrl+B applies bold, Ctrl+I applies italic, and Shift+Enter inserts a line break.
Selecting text displays a small toolbar with the applicable formatting commands.
Keyboard shortcuts can be changed in Settings.

Uninstalling
Use Installed apps in Windows Settings, or run Uninstall Mojinora.exe from the
installation folder. Settings and recovery data are kept by default.
Selecting “Also delete settings and recovery data (including unsaved documents
and temporary images)” removes recovery data too. Save needed documents first.
Saved documents and images are not deleted.

Network access and data
Normal document editing, saving, and recovery take place on your computer.
The app does not automatically send usage analytics or crash reports.
“Load images from remote URLs” is disabled by default. Enabling it connects to
the image hosts specified in your document and shares connection information,
such as your IP address, with those hosts.
Opening an external link launches your default browser and connects to its destination.
The download page uses no analytics, external fonts, contact forms, or cookies.
The hosting server may record access logs according to its operator's policy.

Terms and contact
Free for personal and commercial use. Redistribution to third parties requires permission.
The source code is not public. See LICENSE.txt for the full terms in Japanese and English.
Third-party components retain their own licenses.
Publisher: Mojinora. No public contact channel is currently provided.
